{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 AppleSymbols;
\f3\fnil\fcharset128 HiraginoSans-W3;\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440
\deftab20
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs71\fsmilli35866 \cf2 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone Technical Report\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 UCAM-CL-TR-535\
ISSN 1476-2986\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs34\fsmilli17216 \cf2 Number 535\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 Computer Laboratory\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs49\fsmilli24787 \cf2 Designs, disputes and strategies\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs41\fsmilli20663 \cf2 Claudia Faggian, Martin Hyland\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs34\fsmilli17216 \cf2 May 2002\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 JJ Thomson Avenue\
Cambridge CB3 0FD\
United Kingdom\
phone +44 1223 763500\
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/
\fs23\fsmilli11955 c
\f1  \uc0\u8413 
\f0 2002 Claudia Faggian, Martin Hyland\
Technical reports published by the University of Cambridge\
Computer Laboratory are freely available via the Internet:\
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/TechReports/\
Series editor: Markus Kuhn\
ISSN 1476-2986
\fs19\fsmilli9963 Abstract\
Important progresses in logic are leading to interactive and dynamical models. Geom-\
etry of Interaction and Games Semantics are two major examples. Ludics, initiated\
by Girard, is a further step in this direction.\
The objects of Ludics which correspond to proofs are designs. A design can be\
described as the skeleton of a sequent calculus derivation, where we do not manipulate\
formulas, but their location (the address where the formula is stored). To study\
the traces of the interactions between designs as primitive leads to an alternative\
presentation, which is to describe a design as the set of its possible interactions, called\
disputes. This presentation has the advantage to make precise the correspondence\
between the basic notions of Ludics (designs, disputes and chronicles) and the basic\
notions of Games semantics (strategies, plays and views).\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 1 Introduction\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Interaction has become an important notion both in theoretical computer science and in\
proof theory. From the computational point of view, when running an application the\
result of computation (if there is any) is not necessarely the more interesting aspect. The\
dynamics, the process itself of computation plays a central role. Moreover, composition\
of programs is in general a rich two-directions process, which entails communication and\
exchanges between the components. A paradigm of computation as interaction underlies\
several models of computations. This paradigm is particularly significant today, since\
interaction often appears to be more visible and even more important than computation.\
Important progresses in logic are also leading to interactive and dynamical models.\
Two major examples are Geometry of Interaction and Games Semantics. The Geometry\
of Interaction [5], which arose from Linear Logic, interprets normalization (computation)\
as a flow of information circulating around a net. Games Semantics interprets computation\
as a dialog between two parties, the program (player) and the environment (opponent),\
each one following its own \'93strategy\'94. Games Semantics (see [2] for a survey) has been\
an important development in logic, but also a successful approach to the semantics of\
programming language. The strength of these models is to capture the dynamical aspects\
of computation, so as to take into account both qualitative (correctness) and quantitative\
(e
\f1 \uc0\u64259 
\f0 ciency) aspects of programming languages. Ludics, recently introduced by Girard in\
[6], is a further step in this development, the fundamental notion in the theory being that\
of interaction.\
The basic objects of Ludics are designs, which are both (i) an abstraction of formal\
proofs and (ii) a concretion of their semantical interpretation. A design can be described\
as the skeleton of a sequent calculus derivation, where we do not manipulate formulas, but\
their locations (the addresses where the formulas are stored).\
A design can also be presented in a very natural way as the collection of its possible\
interactions. Our paper focuses on this presentation . An advantage of the approach we\
follow is to establish a bridge with the notions of Game Semantics, in particular with HO\
Games [8]. In fact, we are going to make precise the following correspondences:\
actions \'96 moves\
disputes \'96 plays\
3chronicles \'96 views\
designs \'96 innocent strategies\
The crucial correspondence is\
\'93view - chronicle - sequent calculus branch\'94\
This correspondence is the key to move between Ludics and Games Semantics. To keep\
all notions concrete, one should always remember that a chronicle is a branch in a sequent\
calculus derivation, a design being the \'93skeleton\'94 of a sequent calculus derivation. Condi-\
tions on views, as conditions on chronicles, can easily be understood as conditions on the\
branches of a sequent calculus derivation.\
We expect to be able to transfer experiences and techniques between the two settings.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 2 Ludics in a nutshell\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 2.1 The universe of proofs\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 The program of Ludics is to overcome the distinction between syntax (the formal system)\
on one side and semantics (its interpretation) on the other side. Rather then having two\
separate worlds, all properties of proofs should be determined and tested internally to the\
system, where internally means interactively: proofs are tested with proofs. To do so, it\
is necessary to generalize the notion of proofs.\
In Ludics, a proof must be thought of in the sense of \'93proof search\'94 or \'93proof con-\
struction\'94: we start from the conclusion, and guess a last rule, then the rule above. To\
stop (for example, because no rule can be applied) a new rule is introduced, the daimon:\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u915  \'86\
When using such a rule, we assume the conclusion, without providing a justification. Such\
an aborted proof is still a well defined formal object The gain is that now the universe of\
proofs has enough inhabitants for any proof of A be tested by proofs of A
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 2.2 Designs\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 We begin by giving an intuition of what is a design. This is enough to follow the rest of\
the paper. We recall the precise definitions (to which the proofs refer) in the appendix.\
Instead, we do not really enter in the details of the logical calculus associated to designs,\
which is a focalized version of second order multiplicative-additive Linear Logic (MALL
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ).\
Designs capture the geometrical structure of sequent calculus derivations. The simplest\
way to introduce designs is to start from sequent calculus. Let us consider the following\
derivation, where the rules are labelled by the active formula and the subformulas which\
4appear in the premises
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 : for example, 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0\fs15\fsmilli7970 L 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 would be labelled as (a 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  b, \{a\}).\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  b
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c (c, \{c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs21\fsmilli10909 \})\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  b
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , d (d, \{d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs21\fsmilli10909 \})\
(a, \{a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \})\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , d (b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \{b
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \})\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  c, d, a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \{ a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs21\fsmilli10909 \})\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  c\
&\
d, a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (c\
&\
d, \{c, d\})\
a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c, d are formulas that respectively decompose into a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , b
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 , d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 .\
Let us forget everything in the sequent derivation, but the labels. The derivation above\
becomes the following tree of labels, which is in fact a (typed) design:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 c d\
\{c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs23\fsmilli11955 \} \{d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\

\f2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs23\fsmilli11955 \}\
a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs23\fsmilli11955 \{a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs23\fsmilli11955 \}\
b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\fs23\fsmilli11955 \{b
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs23\fsmilli11955 \}\
a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs23\fsmilli11955 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 \{a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs23\fsmilli11955 ,b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs23\fsmilli11955 \}\
c\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 &\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 d\
\{c,d\}\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  c\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 &\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 d,a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs23\fsmilli11955 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 This formalism is more concise than the original sequent proof, but still carries all\
relevant information to retrieve its sequent calculus counter-part.\
Remark 2.1 (Focalization) What makes this formalism possible is focalization. Multi-\
plicative and additive connectives of Linear Logic (MALL) split into two families: positives\
(
\f2 \uc0\u8855 
\f0 , 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0 , 1, 0) and negatives (\
&\
, &, 
\f2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 , 
\f2 \uc0\u8868 
\f0 ). A cluster of operations of the same polarity can be\
decomposed in a single step. Such a cluster can be written as a single connective, which is\
called a synthetic connective. For example the formula (P
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  Q
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0\fs21\fsmilli10909 )
\f2 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  R
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 has as immediate\
subformulas P
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , Q
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , R
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , to which we applied the connective (\uc0\u8722  
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  \uc0\u8722 ) 
\f2 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  \uc0\u8722 \
As a consequence, in a derivation positive and negative alternate at each step.\
To complete the process, let us now abstract from the type annotation (the formulas),\
writing only the addresses. In the example above, we locate a
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  b
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 at the address \uc0\u958 ;\
for its subformulas a and b we choose the sub-addresses \uc0\u958 1 and \u958 2. Finally we locate a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 in \uc0\u958 10 and b
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 in \uc0\u958 20. In the same way, we locate c\
&\
d at the address \uc0\u963  and so on for its\
subformulas. Our design becomes:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs11\fsmilli5978 \cf2 1
\fs17\fsmilli8966 In first approximation, we slightly simplify the labels; this is possible when working with slices, which\
essentially are multiplicative derivations\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 5
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \uc0\u963 1\
\{0\}\
\uc0\u958 1 \{0\}\
\uc0\u963 2\
\{0\}\
\uc0\u958 2 \{0\}\
\{1,2\}\
\{1,2\}\
\uc0\u958 \
\uc0\u963 \
\uc0\u963  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u958 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 Definition 2.2 (Actions) The pair (\uc0\u958 , I) is called an action. As we have seen, \u958  is an\
address (a list of natural numbers, which is the address of the formula) and I 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 f 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (N) is\
a finite set of natural numbers, the relative addresses of the immediate subformulas we are\
considering. \uc0\u958  is called focus of the action, while I is called ramification.\
\'86 is also an action, but an improper action.\
A design is given by:\
a base, which is a sequent giving the conclusion of the proof (the specification of the\
process) and\
a tree of actions with some properties that we recall in the Appendix. A branch in the\
tree is called a chronicle. If \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is before \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 we write \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 < \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2
\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Slices and additives. The notion of slice was introduced as part of the theory of proof-\
nets in Linear Logic, to speak of the two components of a &-rule. Informally speaking, an\
&-rule is seen as the super-imposition of two unary rules: (a&b, a and (a&b, b). Given a\
derivation, we obtain a slice if for any &-rule we select one of the premises. The derivation\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 ...\
...\
a\
b\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a,c\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  b,c\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a&b,c (a&b,\{a\}),(a&b,\{b\})\
((a&b) 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  d,\{a&b\})\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  (a&b) 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  d,c\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 can be decomposed as the super-imposition of two slices (in each slice the &-rule is unary)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 ...\
a\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a,c\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a&b,c (a&b,\{a\})\
((a&b) 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  d,\{a&b\}) and\
...\
b\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  b,c\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  a&b,c (a&b,\{b\})\
((a&b) 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  d,\{a&b\})\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  (a&b) 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  d,c\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  (a&b) 
\f2 \uc0\u8853 
\f0  d,c\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 In the same way, a design is a superimposition of slices.\
We locate c in the address \uc0\u964 , 
\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  (a&b) in the address \uc0\u958 , (a&b) in \u958 0, a in \u958 01, and b in\
\uc0\u958 02. The derivation of our previous example corresponds to the following design\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 \uc0\u964 \
\uc0\u958 1 \{1\}\
\uc0\u964 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 \uc0\u964 \
\uc0\u964 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 \uc0\u958 1 \{2\}\
\uc0\u958  \{1\}\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 \uc0\u958 1 \{1\}\
whose two slices are \uc0\u958  \{1\}\
\uc0\u958 1 \{2\}\
and \uc0\u958  \{1\}\
The actions (\uc0\u958 1\{1\})/(a&b, a) and (\u958 1\{2\})/(a&b, b) should be be thought of as unary\
&. The usual binary rule is a set of two actions.\
6Notation 2.3 In a slice, each address only appears once, therefore each action is uniquely\
determined by its focus. For this reason, when working with slices we often identify an\
action \uc0\u954  = (\u963 , I) with its focus \u963 .\
Normalization. A set of designs to be cut together is called a cut-net. A cut between\
two designs is a coincidence of addresses of opposite polarity in the base of the two designs.\
The uncut addresses form a base. By far, the most important case in Ludics is the closed\
case: all addresses are cut and the base is empty\
Given a base, its opposite is the base (or family of bases) which allow us to close the net.\
The opposite of 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u958  is \u958  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 ; the opposite of \uc0\u958  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u955 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , . . ., \uc0\u955 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is the family 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u958 , \u955 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 , \uc0\u955 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 .\
Given two design D, E the result of normalization is indicated as [ [D, E] ]. If D, E\
have opposite base, since all addresses are cut, there are only two possible results for\
normalization: either it converges ([ [D, E] ] = \'86) or it fails ([ [D, E] ] = \uc0\u8486 ). In the first case\
the two designs are said orthogonal.\
While the normal form presents no surprise, what we are interested in is the interaction\
itself. An easy way to present normalization of designs is by a token traveling along a\
cut-net (see Appendix). As the token travels on the net, it draws a path: the sequence of\
visited actions, which is the trace of the interaction among the designs, is called a dispute,\
and indicated as [D E]. The part of the cut-net visited during the normalization is\
called the pull-back of that dispute.\
In a design, the same action may appear several times, because of additive duplications.\
What allows us to identify a specific occurrence of an action \uc0\u954  is the chronicle that leads\
us from the base to that action. In the dispute we have enough information to retrieve\
the chronicle that identifies any of its actions (see Proposition 3.6).\
The interaction of designs and counter-designs produces a dispute. Conversely, given\
a dispute, we can reconstruct the design which produced it (the pull-back).\
Plan Our aim is to present a design as the collection of its possible interactions. The\
first step will be to characterize the sequences of actions that correspond to a dispute. We\
will then need to characterize the set of disputes which correspond to interactions of the\
same design, and verify that we have all of them. We therefore need:\
(i) a \'93coherence condition\'94 to guarantee that a set of disputes is compatible, meaning\
that all the disputes are paths on the same design, and\
(ii) a \'93saturation condition\'94 to guarantee we have all the possible paths.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 3 Arenas, players and legal positions\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 In this section we only consider designs (more precisely cut-nets) on the empty base <>.\
The associated \'93dependency tree\'94 is the universal Arena. The generalization to the base\
\uc0\u926  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u923  is straightforward.\
Players: The universe of addresses splits into two players: one owning the even-length\
addresses (Even), the other owning the odd-length addresses (Odd). As soon as we fix\
a point of view, one will be called Proponent (P), the other Opponent (O). There is a\
complete symmetry between the two players: they are of the same nature, and therefore\
they obey to the same rules.\
7Arena: An arena is given by a set of moves, a labelling function from the moves to\
\{P, O\}, and an enabling relation. The Universal Arena is the forest of actions induced by\
the sub-address relation.\
Definition 3.1 (Universal Arena) The universal arena is given by a set of moves, a\
labelling function and an enabling relation, as follows:\
Moves: The moves are all the actions (\uc0\u958 , J), where \u958  is an address and J 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8472 
\f0\fs15\fsmilli7970 fin
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (N).\
Both labelling and enabling are already coded in the action:\
Labels: The labelling is implicit in the address: all even-length addresses are attributed\
to one Player, all odd-length addresses are attributed to the other.\
Enabling relation:\
We say that (\uc0\u958 , I) justifies (\u958 i, J), if i 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  I. We call initial move an action which is not\
justified (the actions whose focus is <>).\
The universal arena A can be delocated to any initial address \uc0\u958 . As usual, the moves\
of \uc0\u958 (A) are those of A with the renaming \u958 (\u963 , I) = (\u958 \u963 , I).\
We call such a structure an atomic arena. An atomic arena is identified by an atomic\
base. The universal arena has base 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 <>.\
Polarity The polarity is relative to the Player: a move is positive for a player if it\
belongs to that player, negative if it belongs to the other. Positive means same parity\
(\'93mine\'94), negative means opposite parity (\'93yours\'94).\
P-move (\'93move belonging to P\'94) = P-positive (\'93move positive for P\'94) = O-negative\
(\'93move negative for O\'94). O-move = O-positive = P-negative.\
Notation 3.2 When we need to specify a player but do not wish to take a point of view,\
we will use the variables X where X 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  \{P, O\} and X for its dual.\
To make explicit if a move \uc0\u954  is P, O, positive or negative we use the notation:\
\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Since it is convenient to fix a point of view, let us fix Proponent to be the one who\
starts (the player owning the initial move) and Opponent the other.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 3.1 Plays\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Definition 3.3 (Linear positions) A sequence of actions s is a linear position, if it\
satisfies the following conditions:\
Parity Parity alternates\
Justification Each move is either initial or is justified by an earlier move.\
Linearity Any address appears at most once.\
Each position belongs to one of the players, according to the last move (the following\
definition takes care of the case where no move has been played yet).\
8Definition 3.4 (X-position) We call P-Position a position that expects an action by\
Opponent. Typically, a position whose last move is P. An O-Position is a position that\
expects an action by Proponent. Observe that if we choose to call Proponent the player\
who starts, \uc0\u1013  is an O-position.\
A P-position is a positive position for P, and a negative position for O. We use the\
notation p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
The key notion is that of view.\
Definition 3.5 (Views) Let q be a linear position and X 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  \{O, P\} a player. Its view\
q 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 of q is inductively defined as follows. When there is no ambiguity on the player, we\
simply write q for q 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 . Below, positive and negative is relative to X.\
\'95 \uc0\u1013  = \u1013 ;\
\'95 s\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = s
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ;\
\'95 s\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 if \uc0\u954  is initial;\
\'95 s\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 t\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = s
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 , if \u954  = (\u958 i, J) and \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = (\uc0\u958 , I)
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
We denote Opponent view by q 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 and Proponent view by q 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 . Moreover, by q\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 we mean the view of the player for which \uc0\u954  is positive. If \u954  belongs to X, then q\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 =\
q\uc0\u954  
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 and q\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = q\uc0\u954  
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
In a design, the same action may appear several times, because of the use of n-ary\
negative rules. What allows us to identify a specific occurrence of an action \uc0\u954  is the\
chronicle that leads us from the base to that action. The operation of view allows one to\
extract from the dispute the chronicle that identifies any of its actions (see [4]):\
Proposition 3.6 (Chronicles extraction) p= [D E] and q\uc0\u954  
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p. Assume \uc0\u954  has\
parity X. The chronicle that identifies \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is q\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (that is q\uc0\u954  
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ). The chronicle that\
identifies \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is q\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (that is q\uc0\u954  
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ).\
The following (standard) definition of play allows us to characterize the sequence of\
actions that correspond to a dispute.\
Definition 3.7 (Legal positions/Plays) We say that a linear position p is legal, or a\
play, if it satisfies the following condition:\
Visibility If t\uc0\u954  
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p where \uc0\u954  is non initial, then the justifier of \u954  occurs in t\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
According to our convention, this means that if \uc0\u954  is a P-move, its justifier occurs in t\u954  
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 ,\
and therefore in t 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , if \uc0\u954  is an O-move, its justifier occurs in t 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Proposition 3.8 (Disputes as plays) Any dispute p on a closed net of base 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 <> is a\
legal position on the universal arena.\
9Proof. Parity and justification are obvious.\
Visibility. Let t\uc0\u954  
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  and \uc0\u954 , say, a P-move. t\u954  
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = c\uc0\u954  is a chronicle. Hence, by definition\
of chronicle, the justifier belong to c.\
Conversely, we shall show that, given a legal position p, we can extract a design S and\
a counter-design T s.t. [S T] = p.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf2 S\
T\
p\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 \{S, T\} is exactly the pull-back associated to p.\
To move from disputes to design we need to deal with the daimon. Our choice is to\
deal with it implicitly, as we shall explain, and retrieve it when we need. However, we also\
add \'86 to the arena as a special move. We use this as an intermediate step which allows us\
more compact definitions.\
Definition 3.9 (Daimon) We extend the universal arena with a formal action \'86. \'86 is\
fixed positive for any player; it does not justify and is not justified by any other action.\
Given a collection of legal positions, we define an operation of (positive) closure w.r.t.\
either of the player: we complete all maximal negative plays with a daimon.\
Definition 3.10 (dai-closure) Let S be a collection of plays on the universal arena. We\
define its positive closure w.r.t. the player X as follows:\
p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = p 
\f2 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  \'86 if p is X-negative, p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = p otherwise.\
S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = \{p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S\}\
Definition 3.11 Let p be a legal position.\
Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p) = \{ q 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 : q 
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p, q \uc0\u824 = \u1013 \}.\
Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p) = \{ q 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 : q 
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p, q \uc0\u824 = \u1013 \}.\
Proposition 3.12 (Pull-back) Let p be a play.\
Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 P 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) is a P-slice, Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 O 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) is an O-slice.\
Proof. Let us fix a point of view, either O or P and check that Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p) is a slice.\
(i) s 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Ch(p) is a chronicle.\
Alternation. obvious. Daimon. obvious. Negative focus. Immediate by the definition\
10of view on a negative action. Positive focus. This exactly corresponds to the visibility\
condition. Destruction of foci: imposed by linearity.\
(ii) Ch(p) is a design, in fact a slice.\
Closure under prefix. Let ck
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 k= qk , q\uc0\u954  
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p. If \uc0\u954  is positive: ck
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = q and q 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  p.\
If \uc0\u954  is negative then c\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954  = s\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 t\uc0\u954 = s \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 . We have c\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = s\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , s\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  q 
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p.\
Coherence. c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Ch(p) are coherent. If c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 are incomparable, let us consider\
c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = c\uc0\u954 . If c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8850 
\f0  c\uc0\u954 \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 and c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8850 
\f0  c\uc0\u954 \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , with \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u824 = \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2
\fs21\fsmilli10909 . then \uc0\u954  is positive. Otherwise\
\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 would be positive. Then c\uc0\u954 \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = s
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1\
P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , c\uc0\u954 \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = s
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2\
P\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , and since linearity\
forces s
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = s
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , thus \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2
\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Ch(p) is a Slice; propagation. Both propagation and the fact that Ch(p) is a Slice\
are forced by linearity. If c(\uc0\u958 , I) = q(\u958 , I) , c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (\uc0\u958 , I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) = q
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (\uc0\u958 , I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) , then by linearity\
q(\uc0\u958 , I) = q
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (\uc0\u958 , I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) and c(\uc0\u958 , I) = c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (\uc0\u958 , I).\
Example 3.13 On the empty base:\
Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (\uc0\u1013 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 P 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) = \{\'86\}, which corresponds to the derivation Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (\uc0\u1013 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs11\fsmilli5978 P 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) = 
\f2 \uc0\u8709 
\f0 , which corresponds to the derivation <>
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 <> \'86\
.\
(<>, 
\f2 \uc0\u8709 
\f0 )\
It is immediate that\
Remark 3.14 If q
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p then Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (q) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p).\
Proposition 3.15 (Plays as disputes) To each play p on the universal arena we can\
associate a pair of slices S, T of respective bases 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 <> <>
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  s.t. [S T] = p; \{S, T\}\
is the pull-back associated to p.\
Proof. Let S= Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 P
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p) and T= Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p). We need to check that [S T] = p.\
This is immediate by the procedure of normalization on designs. If [S T] = t we show\
that for any prefix t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 of length n, t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p.\
If p= \uc0\u1013  the result is immediate. Step 1. The first action in the cut-net is the same as\
the first move of p.\
Let t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 . To perform the n+1-ary step of normalization on S, T, we look in\
the slice where \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is negative, that is the chronicle c\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \
n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 . Let \uc0\u954  = Succ(\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \
n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ); such an action\
exists, either proper or improper, because \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is negative. We know that the chronicle c\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 \
is the view of a prefix of p: p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf2 X\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 , p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954  
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p. Linearity implies that p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 . Hence\
either p= p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 and \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n+1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = \'86 or p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n+1 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  p and \uc0\u954  = \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n+1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 . This also guarantees the\
existence of a chronicle d\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \
n+1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , thus t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 4 Strategies\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Now we want to describe designs as collections of the possible interactions, forgetting the\
notion of design.\
Definition 4.1 (Disp (D)) Let D be a design. Disp D= \{[D E] : E
\f2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 D\}.\
11What we need is a \'93coherence\'94 condition on disputes (characterizing disputes on the same\
design) and a \'93saturation\'94 condition that guarantees we have all such possible interactions.\
To do so let us first define a coherent collection of disputes, a strategy.\
Definition 4.2 (X-Strategy) A P-strategy (O-strategy) S on the universal arena 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 <>\
is a collection of plays (on that arena) which is closed under positive prefix and such that:\
Coherence. If p \uc0\u824 = q 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S then p q is a positive position (a P-position for a P-\
Strategy, an O-position for an O-strategy).\
Remark 4.3 Maximal position (and only maximal position) can be negative. This means\
that the last action is followed by \'86 in the design we are describing.\
Fact 4.4 It is immediate that the above definition is equivalent to the following one, in\
line with the most standard Games Semantics definition:\
S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is a collection of plays such that\
s0. S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is closed under positive prefix;\
s1. p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 then p is positive;\
s2. determinism:\
sb
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , sc
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 then b= c.\
Definition 4.5 (Ch(D)) To an X- strategy S we associate a collection of chronicles\
Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (S) =\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf2 p
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0 S
\fs11\fsmilli5978 \'86X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p).\
Remark 4.6 Ch(S) can be seen as the super-imposition of the slices associated to the\
plays in S.\
It is easy to see that Disp D is a strategy. However, a strategy does not necessarily\
correspond to any construct in Ludics.\
Example 4.7 Let us consider the strategy S on 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 <> given by the closure under prefix of\
\{p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = 
\f2 \uc0\u10216 
\f0 (<>, \{0, 1, 2\}), (0, I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ), (01, I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 01
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ), (1, J)
\f2 \uc0\u10217 
\f0  and\
p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = 
\f2 \uc0\u10216 
\f0 (<>, \{0, 1, 2\}), ((0, I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ), (02, I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 02
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ), (020, I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 020
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ), (01, I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 01
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ), (2, K))\}
\f2 \uc0\u10217 
\f0 \
S is an O-strategy. Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) and Ch
\fs15\fsmilli7970 O
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 2 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) respectively produce the slices:\
020\
02\
1\
01\
0\
<>\
2\
01\
0\
<>\
The two slices cannot co-exist in the same design because they di
\f1 \uc0\u64256 
\f0 er in the way they\
complete the chronicle 
\f2 \uc0\u10216 
\f0 <>, 0, 01
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u10217 
\f0 . The two resulting chronicles are not coherent.\
12If two di
\f1 \uc0\u64256 
\f0 erent disputes cover the same design, when they reach to the same negative\
action they continue in the same way. To arrive at the same action means they are on the\
same chronicle, that is the two path have the same view\
The notion we need to express this condition is exactly that of innocent strategy.\
Definition 4.8 (Innocent strategy) An X-strategy S is innocent if S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 satisfies:\
sab
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 , p
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , pa is a legal position, pa 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = sa 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\f3\fs21\fsmilli10909 \'81\'cb
\f0  pab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (
\f2 \uc0\u8727 
\f0 )\
Innocence plays two roles:\
1. It assures the uniqueness of the move that follows a negative action (cf. Fact 4.15);\
2. It is a condition of \'93saturation.\'94 It guarantees that all the possible disputes on a\
design are taken into account.\
Remark 4.9 As we show in Appendix C one can read \'93innocence\'94 in a very concrete,\
procedural way, as an algorithm to calculate all possible dispute on a given design (or all\
designs orthogonal to a given design.)\
It is well known in Games Semantics that:\
1. The collection of views of an innocent strategy generates, by innocence, the complete\
strategy.\
2. The collections of views of an innocent strategy S is contained in S.\
A design can be seen as the collection of views of an innocent strategy. From the views\
we can recover the strategy, from the strategy we can extract the views.\
Section 4.1 reviews this ideas. Section 4.2 comes back to designs.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 4.1 Innocent strategies: Views and Plays\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 The fact that an innocent strategy can be presented either as a set of plays or as a set\
of views is well known. The constructions V iews(\uc0\u8722 ) and Plays(\u8722 ) correspond to similar\
operations Fun(\uc0\u8722 ) and Traces(\u8722 ) defined in [9] and [7].\
The facts in this section apply to any innocent strategy. All along this section we\
consider w.l.o.g. strategies whose plays are all positive. W.r.t our previous definitions,\
this means that we always work with the closure of our strategies\
S= S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Definition 4.10 (Views(S)) Let S be an X-strategy. We define\
V iews(S) = \{ p 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S\}\
We say that a set of position V is stable under view if p= p for all p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  V.\
Definition 4.11 (Plays(V)) Let V be an X-strategy such that V iews(V) = V. We define:\
P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (V) = \{p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  V : p is minimal for 
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0 \}\
P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n+1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (V) = \{pab s.t. p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (V), 
\f2 \uc0\u8707 
\f0  cab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  V, pa= ca and pa is a legal position\}\
13Plays(V) =\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf2 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (V)\
Fact 4.12 Plays(V) satisfies the property:\
If p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Plays(V) and 
\f2 \uc0\u8707 
\f0  cab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  V s.t. pa= ca and pa is a legal position , then pab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0 \
Plays(V).\
Fact 4.13 (Innocence by views) If S is an X-strategy and V iews(S) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  S, then the\
property (1) in Definition 4.8 is equivalent to the following one:\
cab
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  V iews(S), p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S, pa is a legal position , pa= ca then pab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S (
\f2 \uc0\u8727 \u8727 
\f0 )\
Remark 4.14 We indicate p as c on purpose, to remember we can think of it as a\
chronicle.\
4.1.1 Some properties\
Observe that determinism together with innocence implies in particular that\
Fact 4.15 (Determinism under view) Let S be an innocent X-strategy. If pab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S, qac 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0 \
S, pa= qa then b= c.\
This in particular solves the problem with example 4.7. It also means that V iews(S)\
satisfies itself determinism (cf. Definition 4.2) and thus it is a strategy.\
Proposition 4.16 (Closure under view) If S is an innocent X-strategy then V iews(S) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0 \
S.\
Proposition 4.17 (Saturation) Let T be any strategy and S an innocent strategy. If\
V iews(T) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  S then T 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  S.\
4.1.2 Plays vs. Views\
Proposition 4.18 Let S be an innocent X-strategy.\
V iews(S) is an X-strategy, stable under view.\
Proposition 4.19 Let V be an X-strategy stable under view.\
V iews(Plays(V)) = V\
Proposition 4.20 Let V be an X-strategy stable under view.\
Plays(V) is the smallest innocent strategy which contains V.\
Proof. Plays(V) is a strategy. It is deterministic because V is. Indeed, if sa, sb 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0 \
Plays(V) then sa = s a and sb= s b are in V, hence a = b. Moreover Plays(V) is\
innocent because by construction it satisfies the condition (
\f2 \uc0\u8727 \u8727 
\f0 ) of 4.13.\
If S is an innocent strategy and V 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  S then Plays(V) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  S, because V iews(Plays(V)) =\
V and Proposition 4.17.\
14Proposition 4.21 Let S be an innocent X-strategy.\
Plays(V iews(S)) = S\
Proof. Let V iews(S) = V. V iews(S) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  S implies Plays(V) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  S.\
We show S 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  Plays(V iews(S)) by induction on the length of p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S. Assume tab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  S.\
Observe that tab= ta b= cab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  V. By induction, t 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Plays(V), ta= ca, hence\
tab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Plays(V).\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 4.2 Designs and innocent strategies\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Definition 4.22 Let us indicate by V iews
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8727 
\f0\fs21\fsmilli10909 (S) the set V iews(S)by S the closure under non empty negative prefix of S.\
 \{\uc0\u1013 \}. Let us indicate\
Fact 4.23 Ch(S)
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = V iews
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8727 
\f0\fs21\fsmilli10909 (S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ).\
D= D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 and Ch(S) = V iews
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8727 
\f0\fs21\fsmilli10909 (S
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \'86
\fs21\fsmilli10909 )\
Proposition 4.24 Let D be a design of base X. Then\
D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is an X-strategy stable under view.\
Unfortunately, a strategy stable under view is not a design, in that it does not satisfies\
the condition of linearity (\'93propagation\'94). To guarantee that all slices in a design are\
linear, it is not enough that each single play is linear. This phenomenon is of the same\
nature as similar phenomenons one observes when studying interactive observability (see\
[4]). Since this deserves a separate analysis, it will be discussed in Section 5.\
Here we simply translate the condition of propagation from chronicles to views.\
Definition 4.25 (Propagation) A strategy S satisfies the propagation condition if:\
If t\uc0\u954 , t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u954  
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  V iews(S) and t= c 
\f2 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  (\uc0\u958 , I) 
\f2 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  d, t
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = c 
\f2 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  (\uc0\u958 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , I
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) 
\f2 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 then \uc0\u958 = \u958 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Proposition 4.26 Let V be an X-strategy which is stable under view and which also\
satisfies propagation, then\
V is the positive part of a design D: V= D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 Using the previous proposition and the fact (cf. C) that Disp (D) = Plays(D) =\
Plays(D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) we have that:\
Proposition 4.27 (i) Let D be a design. Then:\
Disp (D) is an innocent strategy,\
the smallest innocent strategy which contains D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
(ii) Let S be an innocent strategy which satisfies propagation. Then:\
Ch(S) is a design.\
15As for V iews and Plays,\
Proposition 4.28\
Proof. Disp (Ch(S)) = S and Ch(Disp D) = D\
Disp (Ch(S)) = Plays(Ch(S)
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ) = Plays(V iews(S)) = S.\
Ch(Disp D) = V iews(Plays(D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +
\fs21\fsmilli10909 )) = D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = D\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 5 Some issues on Linearity\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Extracting strategies from a play. We have shown that to a play p we can associate\
both a design and a counter-design. Notice that the issue of lifting a play to a strategy\
(not a counter-strategy) is addressed by Danos Herbelin and Regnier in [3]. To extract\
both a strategy and a counter-strategy it is essential that p is linear. For example, to the\
play 
\f2 \uc0\u10216 
\f0 \uc0\u945 , \u945 0, \u945 
\f2 \uc0\u10217 
\f0  we can associate a design, but not a counter-design. In other words, this\
play belongs to an innocent strategy, but not to an innocent counter-strategy.\
Propagation and Linear Plays. As we have seen, there is only one delicate point to\
establish a correspondence between designs and innocent strategies, namely that it is not\
enough to consider linear plays. We need to explicitly ask the condition of propagation.\
If we consider linear plays, without imposing propagation on strategies, what do we\
have in ludics? This is not the same as abolishing the condition of propagation in ludics.\
It rather corresponds to making linearity local. W.r.t. computation, a design that satisfies\
linearity locally will behave as a design that satisfies linearity globally.\
We may compare the situation to that in lambda calculus, where non-linearity of a\
term may be serious or not (think for example of the expression \'93if then else\'94).\
Propagation. The condition of propagation is a way to explicitly demand the separation\
of the contexts on a Tensor rule. It is immediate that we can reformulate propagation as:\
\'93In each slice, any address only appears once\'94.\
If we abolish this condition, we need to radically change the theory. In particular, we loose\
linearity of the chronicles, and we do not know how to deal with separation (the analogous\
of B\'a8 ohm theorem in Ludics).\
Linear plays. Let us consider an innocent strategy of linear plays. We can associate to\
it a collection of chronicles. For example, to the innocent strategy \{
\f2 \uc0\u10216 
\f0 \uc0\u958 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \uc0\u958 1, \u945 
\f2 \uc0\u10217 
\f0 , 
\f2 \uc0\u10216 
\f0 \uc0\u958 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \uc0\u958 2, \u945 
\f2 \uc0\u10217 
\f0 \}\
we would associate\
\uc0\u945 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u958 1
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u945 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u958 2
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u958 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 The objects described by innocent linear strategies are linear for all computational purpose.\
16However in this way we do not reach a full completeness result for MALL. Typically,\
we would find a proof such as the following one. This is exactly the proof associated to\
the design above, inside the behaviour which interprets the conclusion of the derivation.\
0 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  A\
0 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  B\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8868 
\f0 , A\

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8868 
\f0 , B\

\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  A
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8866 
\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8868 
\f0 \

\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  B
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8866 
\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8868 
\f0 \

\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  (
\f1 \uc0\u8595 \u8593 
\f0  A) 
\f2 \uc0\u8855 
\f0  (
\f1 \uc0\u8595 \u8593 
\f0  B), 
\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8868 
\f0 \
No play satisfying justification can detect that \uc0\u945  (
\f1 \uc0\u8595 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u8868 
\f0 ) is used twice, visiting both branches\
of the design. This is a typical phenomenon with designs, which also makes impossible to\
detect interactively the use of weakening. The plays approach suggests a possible solution\
in the use of a more liberal notion of play, as in [1].\
If we do not have constants, and therefore all winning designs terminate by a fax, the\
notion of linear play entails propagation, because we can always perform some \uc0\u951 -expansions\
to have enough space to allow all players to reach all addresses.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 6 Further work\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 This work opens the way to several directions to be explored. A natural continuation is\
to develop a presentation of Ludics based on disputes.\
Moreover, since this work establishes a bridge between Ludics and Games Semantics,\
we expect to be able to transfer experiences and techniques between the two settings.\
The use of plays rather than views (chronicles) could allow for a finer analysis. We have\
seen that deseigns correspond to innocent strategies. It is a natural question to ask what\
would be the analogous of general strategies in Ludics. Conversely, to what would lead\
the notion of location in Games?\
Several developments arising in di
\f1 \uc0\u64256 
\f0 erent contexts appear to study structures and con-\
structions which are closely related: designs and a number of variations on the theme of\
innocent strategies, behaviours, orthogonality and double gluing. Our work establishes\
the bases for a deeper investigation in this direction.\
Behaviours and Games Let us sketch the way one would follow to develop a pre-\
sentation of Ludics based on disputes.\
It is immediate that two strategies belonging to opposite players are orthogonal if they\
intersect in a play.\
Definition 6.1 (Orthogonality) S 
\f2 \uc0\u8869 
\f0  T if S 
\f2 \uc0\u8745 
\f0  T= p.\
One can then proceed as in [6]. In particular, one can define a type (a game, a\
behaviour) in an internal way, that is without setting special rules for each type:\
Definition 6.2 (Behaviours / Games) A game G on the arena 
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0 <> is a set of inno-\
cent strategies on the same arena equal to its biorthogonal.\
One can retrieve a more standard definition of game when looking at the incarnation.\
17Definition 6.3 (Incarnation) The incarnation |S| of S is the set of disputes which occur\
both in S and a strategy of G
\f2\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8869 
\f0 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
A strategy is incarnated or material when S= |S|. We define the incarnation |G| of\
G as the set of its material designs\
It is immediate that we have again pleasant phenomenons such as that A&B= A 
\f2 \uc0\u8745 
\f0  B\
and |A&B|= |A| \'d7 |B|.\
The \'93standard\'94 definition of games would correspond to a direct definition of the\
incarnation.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 A Designs as set of chronicles\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Designs are described as set of chronicles. The definition in [6] is in two steps:\
definition of chronicle, that is a formal branch in a focalized sequent calculus derivation,\
definition of a coherence condition making a set of chronicles all belong to the same\
proof.\
Definition A.1 (Chronicle) A chronicle c of base \uc0\u926  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u923  is a non empty sequence of\
actions 
\f2 \uc0\u10216 
\f0 \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , ....\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u10217 
\f0  such that:\
Alternation. The polarity of \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 j 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is equal to that of the base for j even, opposite for j\
odd.\
Daimon. For j < n, \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 j 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is proper.\
Positive focuses. The focus of a positive action \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 either belongs to the basis or is an\
address \uc0\u958 i generated by a previous action: \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 q 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = (\uc0\u958 , I), i 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  I and \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 q 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 < \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p
\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Negative focuses. The focus of a negative action \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 either belongs to the basis or is an\
address \uc0\u958 i generated by the previous action: \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p\uc0\u8722 1 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 = (\uc0\u958 , I), i 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  I\
Destruction of Focuses. Focuses are pairwise distinct.\
Definition A.2 (Coherence) The chronicles c, c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 are coherent when\
Comparability. Either one extends the other, or they first di
\f1 \uc0\u64256 
\f0 er on negative actions,\
i.e. if c = c 
\f2 \uc0\u8743 
\f0  c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  k 
\f2 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  e,\
c = c 
\f2 \uc0\u8743 
\f0  c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  k
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8727 
\f0  e
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 then \uc0\u954 , \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 are negative.\
Propagation. If c, c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 first di
\f1 \uc0\u64256 
\f0 er on \uc0\u954 , \u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8242  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 with distinct focuses, then all ulterior focuses\
are distinct.\
Definition A.3 (Design) A design D of base \uc0\u926  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u923  is a set of chronicles of base \u926  
\f2 \uc0\u8866 
\f0  \uc0\u923 \
such that:\
Arborescence. D is closed under restriction.\
Coherence. The chronicles of D are pairwise coherent.\
Positivity. If c 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D has no extension in D, then its last action is positive.\
Totality. If the base is positive, then D is non empty.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 B Normalization\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Normalization of a closed net, that is of a cut-net where all addresses are cut, is especially\
simple. We start on the first action of the main design (the only design starting with a\
positive action).\
18Transitions: When entering a positive action, we exit at the corresponding negative\
action (then changing of design), and move to the unique action that follows.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 Transitions:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f4\fs28\fsmilli14400 \cf2 Initialization:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 j\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 Main\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs23\fsmilli11955 \cf2 +\
D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 i\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 + \uc0\u963 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 ...\
\uc0\u963 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs23\fsmilli11955 ...\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 Observe that if we do not work with slices, in a design the same action may appear several\
times, because of additive duplications. However, the sequence of visited actions carries\
all information needed to retrieve the position of any its action (Proposition 3.6). In\
particular, when we enter a positive action \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 we are able to retrieve the chronicle that\
identifies the negative action \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 to which we have to move. Assume p is the sequence of\
actions we have visited so far, and we enter the positive action \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 . We then move to the\
action \uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722  
\fs21\fsmilli10909 identified by the chronicle d= p\uc0\u954 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 C Generating Disp D\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 If we want to calculate all possible disputes on a given design D we would not generate\
all possible designs of opposite base and execute the normalization... What we can do\
is to trace all possible paths, and verify that they correspond to a counter-slice. As we\
have just seen, this amounts to verify that the path is a dispute/play. This guarantees\
that the tree of actions of opposite polarity satisfies the the sub-address condition, which\
is the sense of the visibility condition for plays. Actually, calculating the paths which are\
disputes is also the easiest way to calculate the orthogonal of a design. Let us write a\
procedure to do this.\
Definition C.1 A chronicle c is positive (negative) if its last action is positive (negative).\
Let us indicate by D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 the subset of positive chronicles of D. We call it the positive part\
of D.\
Observe that:\
1. From D\'92s point of view, a disputes always terminates on a positive action: either \'86\
is in D (therefore normalization terminates on the chronicle p 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 \'86) or \'86 is in E, therefore\
the last action of p is negative in E and positive in D.\
2. Moreover:\
D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  Disp D\
because for any c
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D, [D Opp
\fs15\fsmilli7970 c
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ] = c.\
19A completed dispute will always stop on a positive action (possibly \'86). To do an\
exhaustive search, we trace all possible positive paths of a given length, starting from the\
minimal ones.\
Definition C.2 (Plays(D)) Let D be a design of base X. We define:\
P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 0
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (D) = \{c 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 : c is minimal for 
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0 \}\
P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n+1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (D) = \{pab s.t. p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (D) and 
\f2 \uc0\u8707 
\f0  cab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 : pa is a legal play and pa 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 =\
ca\}\
Plays(D) =\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf2 n 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (D), augmented of \{\uc0\u1013 \} if D has negative base.\
This procedure describes all disputes on D. It is easy to understand the step P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 n+1\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 if one has in mind normalization. Let E
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 be a counterdesigns that with D realizes the\
dispute p: p= [D E
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ]. If p 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D is not followed by \'86 then p 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  E, which\
continues with \'86.\
Let us look for a design E
\fs15\fsmilli7970 pab
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , such that [D E
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p
\fs21\fsmilli10909 ] = pab. To do so, we substitute \'86\
with an action a such that that (i) the new design will converge against D and (ii) d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 is actually chronicle (it must satisfy the sub-address condition). Therefore we need an\
action a s.t. (i) pa= ca is in D and (ii) pa is a play. Since pa+ = da
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , visibility\
implies that a
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 is justified by an action in d.\
Normalization will proceed as with E
\fs15\fsmilli7970 p 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 until the token is on the last action of d
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722 \

\fs21\fsmilli10909 . From\
here it moves on to a, and then to a in pa 
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 = ca
\fs15\fsmilli7970 \uc0\u8722  
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D. There is a unique action b\
which completes this chronicle. Either b is \'86, and we are done, or we add b
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 to E (we\
have seen several times that this is always possible) and complete the new chronicle with\
\'86. We have built the design E
\fs15\fsmilli7970 pab 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 we wanted.\
Proposition C.3 Disp D= Plays(D).\
Proof. Let pab
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\f2\fs21\fsmilli10909 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Disp D. Being a dispute, pa 
\f2 \uc0\u8849 
\f0  pab is a legal position. For\
the induction, assume p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Plays(D). There is an i such that p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 i
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (D). Moreover,\
qpab= cab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 and pa= ca. Hence, pab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 i+1
\fs21\fsmilli10909 .\
Let p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  PlaysD. If p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 , then p 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  Disp D. Since p is a play, we already know that\
Pull(p) is a cut-net and that [Pull
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p) Pull
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p)] = p. We check that Pull
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (p) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  D,\
by induction on the length of p. Assume p= qab
\fs15\fsmilli7970 + 
\fs21\fsmilli10909 and Pull
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (q) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  D. There is an i for\
which qab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  P
\fs15\fsmilli7970 i
\fs21\fsmilli10909 , qa = ca, and cab 
\f2 \uc0\u8712 
\f0  D
\fs15\fsmilli7970 +\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 . Therefore qa = ca and qab= cab are both\
chronicles of D, hence Pull
\fs15\fsmilli7970 X
\fs21\fsmilli10909 (qab) 
\f2 \uc0\u8838 
\f0  D.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 References\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 [1] S. Abramsky, K. Honda, and G. McCusker. A fully abstract game semantics for general\
references. In Proceedings LICS\'9298. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1998.\
[2] S. Abramsky and G. McCusker. Computational Logic, chapter Game semantics. Springer-\
Verlag, 1999.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\partightenfactor0

\fs21\fsmilli10909 \cf2 20
\fs19\fsmilli9963 [3] V. Danos, H. Herbelin, and L. Regnier. Games semantics and abstract machines. In Proceedings\
LICS\'9296. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1996.\
[4] C. Faggian. On the Dynamics of Ludics. A Study of Interaction. PhD thesis, Universit\'b4\
e\
Aix-Marseille II, 2002.\
[5] J.-Y. Girard. Geometry of interaction i: Interpretation of system f. In Z. A. Ferro R.m\
Bonotto C., Valentini S., editor, Logic Colloquium 88, pages 221\'96260. North Holland, 1989.\
[6] J.-Y. Girard. Locus solum. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 2001.\
[7] R. Harmer. Games Semantics and Full Abstraction for Nondeterministic Languages. PhD\
thesis, Imperial College, 1999.\
[8] M. Hyland and L. Ong. On full abstraction for PCF. Information and Computation, 2000.\
[9] G. McCusker. Games and Full Abstraction for a Functional Metalanguage with Recursive Types.\
PhD thesis, Imperial College, University of London, 1996.\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 21}